Bots - The Origin of New Species
By ANDREW LEONARD
Hardwired


**CHAPTER ONE**
------------------------------------------------------------------------

**A Plague of Barneys**

The Barney Problem 1

No one could ever accuse the wizards of Point MOOt of thinking too
small.

They dreamed of simulating a fully functional society, lodged with
the digital recesses of a computer, true in all essential categories
to the principles of the real world. They called this dream
"reality modeling."

But just as dreams are never more than a half step from nightmares,
the "reality" of Point MOOt never quite "modeled" as expected.
Consider for example, how the wizards endeavored to save their
infant civilization from class warfare and ended up with a plague of
Barneys.

Back in the spring of 1993, optimism abounded in the Advanced
Communication Technologies Laboratory at the University of Texas at
Austin. Anything was possible at the ACTLab, a hothouse for
experiment in digital culture directed by Professor Allucquere
Rosanne Stone. A transsexual specialist in the mysteries of identity
and gender bending, Stone encouraged creative approaches to the
investigation of social realities. The transformative possibilities
of imaginatively constructed online communities particularly
fascinated her. Designating a computer to be at the disposal of the
Point MOOt wizards -- a hodgepodge of undergrads, doctoral
students, and intrigued volunteers -- she gave them carte blanche
to create a brand-new world.

Programmed from a hard-drive tabula rasa, Point MOOt began as a
top-down exercise in social engineering. But the wizards anticipated
no difficulties in attracting a citizenry. Build it, they reasoned,
and the masses would come. Anyone who could connect, via the
Internet, to the computer that housed the code for Point MOOt
qualified as a potential immigrant. If you could log on, you could
move in.

The wizards labored day and night encoding an impressive civic
infrastructure. Located at a fictional West Texas crossroads, Point
MOOt boasted a university, several strip malls, and a TV station.
Cafes, bars, and restaurants lined the streets. Trailer parks and
tenement buildings, hospitals and churches, Point MOOt had
everything a healthy city requires. There was even an underground
cult that worshiped Cthulu, a slime-covered grayish green monster
who periodically stormed through towns, trampling buildings and
kidnapping unlucky citizens. No town is perfect.

Gathered together from construction sites scattered throughout
cyberspace, the Point MOOt wizards did not lack for experience.
Similar computer-based virtual worlds -- known generically as MUDs,
or multi user domains -- began appearing in 1979. From their
earliest incarnations as online versions of popular fantasy
role-playing games such as Dungeons and Dragons, MUDs gradually
evolved into community hangouts: havens in the digital ether where
like-minded individuals could engage in no-holds-barred, text-based
"conversation."

Today MUDs have morphed into a dazzling array of forms that include
interactive, three-dimensional, animated environments. In a
state-of-the-art virtual world, inhabitants can choose full-bodied
avatars as representations of themselves and navigate through
stimuli-packed explosions of sound, pictures, and even video. But as
recently as 1993, most communication and experience on the Net were
manifested through the vehicle of text. MUDs were worlds built out
of words. A MUD visitor typed the com-mand >@look< and saw a text
description of a person, place, or thing. MUD objects, rooms, and
characters could have various properties -- the ability to move, to
change, to speak -- depending on how the wizards programmed them.
But the essential quality of MUDlife was textual.

Point MOOt belonged to a subset of MUDs known as MOOs. The acronym
"MOO," short for "MUD object-oriented," referred to the
difference between the programming languages used to write the
underlying architecture of MUDs and MOOs. The MOO language,
developed by Pavel Curtis at the legendary Xerox PARC (Palo Alto
Research Center), took the basic ideas of the MUD language to a more
accessible level. Many of Point MOOt's wizards -- crafty geeks
sporting gaudy noms de cyberplume like Chiphead and Chivato, Smack
and Racer-X, Warhol and Ogre -- were veterans of landmark MOOs,
such as Curtis's LambdaMOO or the rollicking poststructuralist
playground PMC (Post Modern Culture) MOO. Point MOOt offered these
wizards a blank canvas on which to sharpen their skills and to
exercise their imaginations.

Though the wizards had differing motivations -- some were radical
left-wing revolutionaries, some were troublemakers, and some just
wanted to build a city -- they were united by a desire to make
Point MOOt a special place, a new stage in the evolution of MUDs.
Their ambitions knew no limits. "We tested both the boundaries of
the virtual society and of `real' society itself," wrote
archwizard Allan Alford.

But the wizards soon discovered that testing boundaries is dangerous
business. Social engineering is far from a perfect science. Reality
is a mess, and reality modeling is even messier. Every problem
solved engendered new, unforeseen dilemmas. Every effort at
programming a new world led directly to old-world bugs. And just as
was true in meatspace -- where real people met face-to-face -- the
business of economics proved to be the toughest nut to crack.

Point MOOt had an economy based on quota, or MOOlah, as it was
sometimes called. If you wanted to build yourself a home, you needed
MOOlah. If you wanted to buy products or services offered by other
citizens, you had to hand over some MOOlah. MOOlah was both the
currency of the realm and the raw matter of construction. One built
one's private palace out of MOOlah.

In Point MOOt, MOOlah did not grow on trees, nor did it miraculously
materialize in plain sight out in the streets, waiting to be picked
up and pocketed, as was commonplace in other MUDs. MOOlah had to be
earned. If you wanted to be a productive citizen of Point MOOt, able
to enjoy the finer things in life, you had to get a job. Sure, you
could always head on over to Nurlene Moot's office at City Hall and
ask the suspiciously narrow-minded bureaucrat for a welfare
application. But that didn't appeal to everyone. In West Texas,
throwing yourself at the mercy of the state wasn't a popular
option. Far better that you made the trip to see Buford Moot. Though
Buford, like Nurlene, occasionally came off as just another obtuse
paper pusher, in his capacity as city planner he could write out job
contracts for a long list of available employment opportunities.
Most involved working on the city itself: constructing housing,
building roads, creating civic spaces. Some were less conventional.
The wizards were not afraid to embrace the dark side in their
reality modeling. One of Buford's job contracts offered MOOlah to
anyone who could concoct a business scam designed to rip off fellow
residents.

There was just one catch. To accomplish any of these jobs, you
needed to be conversant in the MOO programming language that was to
Point MOOt what drywall and concrete are to real-world metropolises.
You needed to be MOO-literate.

As programming languages go, MOO isn't especially difficult. It's
not as if would-be Point MOOt wage earners were being asked to get
down and dirty with machine language digital instructions meant to
be read directly by a computer. The MOO language is easy to master;
introductory manuals are available free for downloading at locations
scattered across the Internet. Still, to many people, the prospect
of grappling with any programming language at all presents a serious
obstacle. Basic programming cannot compare to the cognitively
oppressive challenge of, say, abstract math or Heideggerian
philosophy, but to a substantial sector of the population the act of
programming seems impossibly difficult. Most people would rather not
even try.

So the wizards of Point MOOt had a problem. Reality modeling was a
noble goal, but requiring people to work at jobs for which they did
not have the necessary skills struck some city planners as a tad
unfair. Worse, it could prove positively damaging to the fabric of a
civic society. The last thing the wizards wanted to see was the
immediate stratification of the citizenry of their spanking-new city
into upper and lower classes based upon who had the chops to whip up
a simple MOO program. The MOO-slinger digerati would sip martinis in
expensive cafes, while the programming lumpen waited for welfare
checks and sweated in the projects on the outskirts of town.

Rather than stock up on barricades and barbed wire for the
inevitable bloody revolution, Point MOOt's wizards sought another
way. There was little point in their grand experiment if they let it
devolve into sullen chaos right from the inception. There was only
one permissible answer: widespread access to easy jobs, jobs that
anybody could handle, whether or not they knew how to hack MOO code.

In a private email discussion group used to exchange programming
tips and good old gossip, the wizards bandied about possible
solutions. And fortunately, as programmers, they were blessed with
the power to make real changes. As the ultimate arbiters of every
facet of Point MOOt life, the wizards could choose from a
considerably wider range of options than your average real-world
commissar or ruling party policy wonk. The solution they hit upon
proved both imaginative and irresistible. In Point MOOt, no citizen
would be forced into penury. If welfare was too shameful and regular
work too hard, one choice still remained.

Unemployed? Go kill a Barney.

Deep beneath the city of Point MOOt lay a labyrinth of
interconnected subterranean rooms. Inaccessible to most of Point
MOOt's citizens, these rooms contained a bizarre assortment of
wizard works in progress. In one such room lurked an exceedingly odd
contraption -- the Barney-spewing machine. Every so often, the
Barney-spewing machine lurched into motion and spat out a man
dressed in a purple dinosaur suit. A Barney. A digitally constructed
clone of that sweeter-than-sweet children's television character
who is adored by two-year-olds everywhere, tolerated by their
parents, and loathed by all other members of civilized society.
Shortly after conception, the Barney, like some hideous beast from
the netherworld seeking the light of day, ascended a twisted network
of hidden tunnels until it reached the aboveground town of Point
MOOt.

To this day, the wizards of Point MOOt hedge and start to mumble
when asked why they chose to inflict the likeness of Barney on their
fair city. At first, it was just a lark, a snug fit with Point
MOOt's Texan/sci-fi theme. In any event, such displays of
self-mocking silliness are not all that unusual in online
environments: a fair percentage of cyberculture's architects spent
far too many hours of their youth watching Saturday morning
cartoons.

But origin question notwithstanding, Barneys became a staple of
Point MOOt life. There was no avoiding them. They could wander the
length and breadth of the MOO. They could open the doors to any
room. And they were vocal to the point of becoming a public
nuisance.

Allan Alford, a fast-talking Texan and the single most important
driving force behind the creation and evolution of Point MOOt, did
not personally initiate the Barney phenomenon. But he remembers it
well, with a wistful nostalgia in wry counterpoint to his otherwise
sincere, and serious, ruminations on the progressive social goals of
Point MOOt.

"They roamed the MOO singing the Barney song," says Alford. (A
terror indeed, as anyone who has been exposed to the song is well
aware.)

Woe betide the citizen unable to keep cool in the face of a
serenading Barney. Physical violence against a Barney (expressed in
MOOish by text commands such as >@hit Barney< or >@kick Barney<)
was not the answer. If attacked, Barneys frequently fell apart -- a
lopped-off arm here, an amputated leg there -- then regenerated,
one new Barney from each separate body part. The reproductive feat
ensured a steady Barney population explosion, since the human
residents of Point MOOt often found it difficult to restrain their
anti-Barney animosities.

The Barneys were pests.

"They were actively annoying -- free-roving, self-spawning, and
could pick locks. That's what made them horrible," says Alford.

The wizards decided to kill two MOObirds with one MOOstone. They had
too many Barneys and not enough jobs. So they created a new job:
Barney hunter, a job for the masses, requiring of citizens only that
they be able to type the command >@shoot Barney<.

You had to be equipped with a Barney Blaster gun before you could
start taking potshots, but that was easy enough. Harley Moot, Point
MOOt's chief bounty hunter, had access to an inexhaustible supply
of Barney Blasters, available to the general public without waiting
periods or credit checks. Point the Barney Blaster at a Barney, type
>@shoot Barney<, and boom! A purple man-size dinosaur hit the
turf, shredding into several nonregenerating parts. Harley Moot paid
one unit of MOOlah for each dead Barney, payable upon delivery of
Barney's severed head.

For a brief moment, the wizards thought their problem solved. The
techno-proletariat had been assured a minimum wage. Barney hunting
became Point MOOt's most popular pastime. A steady stream of fresh
Point MOOt immigrants lined up at Harley Moot's door.

But the central importance of Barney hunting to the Point MOOt
economy soon led to unexpected results. All of Point MOOt's
citizens, even the ones who did know their way through mazes of MOO
code, started to pay close attention to the purple man-beast with
the silly smile. They discovered that if they typed in different MOO
commands besides >@shoot< (such as >@feed< or >@impregnate<)
they could cause interesting things to happen.

Impregnated Barneys gave birth to new Barneys, saddled at birth with
individual names that combined the name "Barney" with the online
nickname of the human who had forced his or her attention on its
parent. (If you saw a Chivato-Barney wandering around, you knew
Chivato had been naughty.) Barneys stuffed with food presented a
worse problem. Barneys were insatiable: they continued eating
nonstop until ballooning in size and exploding. And the fragments of
an exploded Barney spawned five new Barneys! One mad Point MOOt
scientist figured out a simple series of MOO commands that looped
the feeding cycle. After the first overfed Barney exploded and
reproduced, all the new Barneys commenced eating until
oversatiation. Over and over again.

The combined production of the Barney-spewing machine, Barneys
looped into a feeding frenzy, and the normal population growth
attributable to kicked and beaten Barneys ensured that the wizards
of Point MOOt, after narrowly averting the tragedy of class warfare,
now had a new problem. The Barney problem.

At any given moment, any location in Point MOOt could be overrun by
hundreds of vacuously grinning purple dinosaurs, all singing the
Barney song. "They would come and go in huge waves," says Alford.
"And they far exceeded the number of Barney hunters."

From the perspective of a Point MOOt citizen, whose view of the
world was confined to text scrolling across a computer monitor, the
experience of a Barney onslaught was disorienting, even frightening.
Suddenly the monitor exploded with an endless stream of "I love
you, you love me" sentences spiraling down the screen. The Barney
scourge put a real damper on the possibilities of civic life in
Point MOOt.

**A Certain Quality of Inhumanity 2**

Barney was a bot. Not a very smart bot, and not a very useful bot,
but a bot nonetheless.

A bot is a software version of a mechanical robot. Like a mechanical
robot, it is guided by algorithmic rules of behavior -- if this
happens, do that; if that happens, do this. But instead of clanking
around a laboratory room bumping into walls, software robots are
programs that maneuver through cyberspace, bouncing off of
communication protocols and operating systems.

Strings of code written by everyone from teenage chat room lurkers
to topflight computer scientists, bots are variously designed to
carry on conversations, act as human surrogates, or achieve specific
tasks -- in particular, to seek out and retrieve information. Bots
entertain, annoy, work, and play.

Over the past decade, as the online universe has exploded
supernova-like into every interstice of modern life, bots have begun
to flourish. In every neighborhood of the Net, bots either lurk
behind the scenes or demand attention, front and center. Mailbots
filter electronic mail, preventing junk mail and spam advertising
from clogging up our online mailboxes. Chatterbots carry on
whimsical conversations in online, real-time text environments, such
as chat rooms or MUDs. Cancelbots seek out unwanted expression and
erase it from electronic bulletin boards. Gamebots populate computer
game environments with believable characters and wily foes. Web
robots explore the hyperlinked reality of cyberspace, mapping out
and indexing the vast quantities of information available through
the World Wide Web.

Bots are the first indigenous species of cyberspace, a class of
creatures dazzling in its infinite variety. Web robots, spiders,
wanderers, and worms. Cancelbots, modbots, Lazarus, and the
Automoose. Softbots, userbots, taskbots, chatterbots, knowbots, and
mailbots. MrBot and MrsBot. Bartender-bots, BalooBear bots, and bolo
bots. Warbots, clonebots, crashbots, floodbots, annoybots, hackbots,
and Vladbots. Turing bots. Tsunami bots. Gaybots, gossipbots, and
gamebots. Prostibots. Conceptbots and RoverBots. Skeletonbots,
spybots, slothbots, and spambots. Xbots and metabots. Eggdrop bots.
Motorcycle-bull-dyke bots.

Most bots, unlike the Barney bots, refrain from singing silly songs
or exploding into overeating-induced spasms of bodily fragmentation,
but all bots share some aspects of the Barney experience. Their
evolution is full of high hopes, unexpected wrong turns, near
catastrophes, and wild exuberance.

In one form or another, bots have been around since the early 1960s.
But there is no consensus on what particular sequence of encoded
ones and zeros truly classifies a bot. Bot genetic structures remain
inadequately mapped. The word bot -- a slang truncation of robot
-- describes everything from a simple logon script (like one that
might save a user the trouble of typing in a phone number, a
password, and a user identification code every time that user wants
to go online) to complex programs written in the latest,
most-advanced programming languages and designed to execute tasks
that most humans would find impossible.

At Point MOOt, Barney was just one of many bots proud to call
virtual West Texas their home. In the early summer of 1994, fully
half of Point MOOt's population were bots. Nurlene, Buford, and
Harley Moot weren't just closely related. In addition to sharing a
last name, they shared a certain quality of inhumanity. They were
bots.

As were all the city officials. Bots greased the wheels of Point
MOOt bureaucracy. They were an essential part of the reality
modeling process. In Point MOOt, you never knew where the next bot
would turn up. Point MOOt had bum bots, ne'er-do-well homeless
wanderers who shuffled up to citizens, panhandled them, and refused
to leave unless given some MOOlah. Annoying, often, but not half so
bad as the hooker bots, who evinced no shame whatsoever about
propositioning citizens in broad daylight. One brazen hussy hooker
bot once strolled right into Buford Moot's office while he was
interviewing a prospective job applicant! Point MOOt even had a
pseudo-Hunter Thompson bot -- a beer-swilling gonzo journalist who
hung around in cafes and bars and had an unpleasant habit of
suddenly losing his cool, leaping up, and spraying Mace at the
nearest human.

Allan Alford's personal favorite was Chico, a bot formed in the
persona of a foreign exchange student. In this guise, the bot could
get away with making syntactical errors that would otherwise betray
his robotic DNA. Alford toiled for months on Chico, writing
elaborate sentence-parsing algorithms designed to enable the bot to
learn new vocabulary and master complicated grammar.

The bots added color to Point MOOt. More important, though, the city
official bots saved the wizards from having to deal with the hassles
and minutiae of running the city on a daily basis.

"My first idea," says Alford, "was to hire people to become
bureaucrats and pay them with quota [MOOlah]. But no one wanted to
do it, or if they did want to do it, they weren't around when they
were needed.... But then I suddenly realized -- this is a
programmed environment. Bots were the key. I began developing bots
to essentially become town bureaucrats....

"Nurlene would talk to you, interview you, explain the rules, make
you sign the right forms, and then transfer you to the welfare
system," says Alford.

Barney started as a joke and evolved into an economic cog. But
Buford and Nurlene were designed from the beginning as labor-saving
devices. As such, they unconsciously harked back to the derivation
of the word robot. First used by Czechoslovakian science fiction
writer Karel Capek to describe mechanical beings, the word means
"forced labor" in the original Czech.

Buford and Nurlene were tools. Slaves, even, or at best, indentured
servants. The bum bots and hooker bots were characters, role players
in the community. Barney ended up being a little of both. A bot can
be many things: it's a concept that defies easy categorization.

Bot is short for robot, which is cooler than program," says John
Leth-Nissen, a hacker who hangs out on the Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
network. And that captures part of the bot equation. Bots are cool.
They stoke our imaginations with the promise of a universe populated
by beings other than ourselves, beings that can surprise us, beings
that are both our servants and, possibly, our enemies. Bots, which
are here, now, and growing in number and power every day, are
advance scouts from the future.

But the gee-whiz cool factor only scratches the surface of why bot
movements should be watched with an eagle eye. Bots represent both
the aspirations of the cutting edge of the computer research
community and the voracious hopes and dreams of software
entrepreneurs. Bots are a test bed for experiments in the arena of
artificial intelligence, and they're a stab at solving the ever
sticky problem of making the interface between humans and computers
effortless and enjoyable. Bots are a way of thinking about how we
interact with computers: our desire to attribute personality to
programs is as much about our desire to fill the world with myths
and legends as it is about any definable, hard-coded reality.

Some of the rhetoric about bots aims too high. Sherry Turkle, an MIT
psychologist who specializes in online interactions, defines a bot
as a "small artificially intelligent program." She may be jumping
the gun. Artificial intelligence is far from a done deal. The
concept of intelligence, in daily life, resists easy definition; to
attribute it to a computer program is to beg for debate. Is
intelligence the ability to speak a natural language? to have common
sense? to reason? Or is it, as Alan Turing suggested, a computer
program's ability to pass itself off as a human being? Is it merely
a matter of tricks and prestidigitation?

Certainly, one would be hard put to make the case that the Barney
bot had much more intelligence than a doorknob. On the chain of
bot-being, the Barney bot ranks pretty low. But then again, if one
could suspend disbelief long enough to accept that men in purple
dinosaur suits inhabited the town of Point MOOt, perhaps one could
also succeed in pretending that the Barneys displayed a modicum of
intelligence.

A more accurate definition than Turkle's might run as follows: a
bot is a supposedly intelligent software program that is autonomous,
is endowed with personality, and usually, but not always, performs a
service.

Personality implies that the bot displays some aspect of human
behavior or has in some way been anthropomorphized. Barney had
personality galore, even if most of his acquaintances found it
irredeemably repulsive. Autonomous means that the bot must be able
to do its work without direct human supervision. Barney was
autonomous: he wandered from room to room in Point MOOt without
being told where to go in advance or having to be prodded at each
step. And Barney performed a service: originally he provided comic
relief; later he became an economic mainstay.

The service aspect of bots is crucial, a character trait running at
cross angles to issues of autonomy, personality, or intelligence.
Nurlene Moot, the city official, had a purpose in life -- not just
as the administrator of the dole but also as interface between the
wizards and their creation. Through Nurlene the wizards ensured that
certain tasks were carried out that the wizards either refused to do
or were too busy to do. Nurlene also served as interface between the
citizens of Point MOOt and the interior workings of the city.

The service/interface aspect is what makes a bot something greater
than a curiosity. Bots are the first precursors to the intelligent
agents that many visionaries see as indispensable companions to
humans in the not-too-distant future. Intelligent agents are
software programs designed to help human beings deal with the
overwhelming information overload that is the most obvious drawback
to the information age.

Though agents and bots significantly overlap, the two categories are
not exactly equivalent. Agents do not require the accoutrements of
personality: human names, the ability to crack a bad joke, zany
habits. And though bots can be very useful, they are not forced,
like agents, to work hard for their digital room and board. A
chatterbot that sits in a MUD and talks about ice hockey with anyone
who says hello is not an agent.

But for an agent to be really successful in its chosen task, it may
need to be a bot or, as some in the industry prefer to say, a
believable agent. True botness makes a computer program or a
computer environment more approachable, more entertaining, more
user-friendly -- drastically important considerations for those who
wish to create successful agent prototypes, either for academic
research or for the consumer marketplace.

Listen for a moment to one of the leading apostles of agent
religion, Nicholas Negroponte, director of MIT's Media Lab, as he
explains why agents should be considered an attractive necessity.
After discussing the baffling responsibilities of hectic modern
life, he wonders, "Wouldn't you really prefer to run your home and
office life with a gaggle of well-trained butlers (to answer the
telephone), maids (to make the hospital corners [on your bed]),
secretaries (to filter the world), accountants or brokers (to manage
your money), and on some occasions, cooks, gardeners, and chauffeurs
when there were too many guests, weeds, or cars on the road?"

In Negroponte's vision, these tasks are performed not by actual
humans but by individualized, personified computer programs.
Negroponte calls his digital butlers "agents." But he could just
as well call them bots. Bot: Find me the best price on that CD, get
flowers for my mom, keep me posted on the latest developments in
Mozambique.

Negroponte's vision is shared by a horde of entrepreneurs currently
stampeding into cyberspace with agent products. The giants of the
computer industry -- Microsoft and Intel, IBM and Apple -- are
funneling millions of dollars into agent research. But both the
ivory-tower academics and the corporate researchers are pushing down
from the top, seeking new tools to aid them in their quest for the
secrets of intelligence or bottom-line profit bonanzas.

Bots, meanwhile, just happen, out there in the vast and growing
wildernesses of the Net. Instead of seeking the bottom line, they
are growing from the bottom up, a grassroots phenomenon, as likely
to be conceived by bored teenagers looking for fun as by PhDs from
Stanford or MIT. There are no international conferences devoted to
bots, no high-powered academic departments with "autonomous bot"
groups. The evolution of the Barney bots of Point MOOt was
accidental, unscripted, and unpredictable. And there, in a nutshell,
is the story of the evolution of all bots. They are the spawn of the
Net's anarchy and decentralization, the product of a thousand
different hackers writing code on a thousand different computers.

Bots, like all creatures, belong to their environment. And in this
case, that environment is the Net. The proliferating MUDs, the
thousands of bulletin boards that make up Usenet news, the
practically infinite chat rooms of the IRC network, the inexorably
spreading and morphing World Wide Web -- only in the most
accidental of ways can the Net be said to have been planned or
organized or regimented. It is a massively successful example of the
power of parallel distribution -- endlessly inventive, endlessly
changing.

This multiplicity of Net environments is one reason why attempting
to discern a particular genealogy or anatomy of bots is a mission
fraught with semantic and logistic peril. Bots comprise not just one
new species but a complete spectrum of new species, a brand-new
phylum under the digital sun.

As interface, as artificial intelligence experiment, as pure
playthings, bots exert a strange attraction on the human inhabitants
of cyberspace. The bots of Point MOOt, and the Net, make for a good
story. But so do the bot problems. The evidence of a plague of
Barneys is a warning bell signaling more than just what can go wrong
in the case of improper or incompletely thought-out programming.

Bots don't have to be benign, and bot misbehavior doesn't have to
be accidental. Bots can be instructed to do whatever their creators
want them to do, which means that along with their potential to do
good they can also do a whole lot of evil.

With newbie botmaster wannabes joining the Net in huge numbers every
day, bad bot shenanigans are bound to get worse. The Net is no
longer a playground for just the technically clued in. It is
increasingly complex, and it increasingly reflects the strains and
pressures of the real world. Commercial incentives fuel ever growing
levels of investment. The steady influx into cyberspace of the
age-old viral hatreds and lunacies that infect the world's
face-to-face culture will only increase. Bots will be -- and are
-- the vehicle for uncontrollable passions.

Bots aren't just cool. They're trouble.

(C) 1997 Andrew Leonard All rights reserved. ISBN: 1-888869-05-4

[![](data:image/gif;base64,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){width="118"
height="47"
border="0"}](https://www.nytimes.com/books/bn/author?sourceid=4773&is_search=Y&match=exact&options=and&anotherlevel=Y&title=bots&author_first=andrew&author_last=leonard)
![](data:,){.sf-hidden border="0" width="1" height="1" md8l8zojd=""}

[Return to the Books Home Page](https://www.nytimes.com/books)



+:----------------------------------+:---------------------------------:+
|                                  | -------------------------------   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | [**                               |
|                                   | Home**](https://www.nytimes.com/) |
|                                   | | [**Site                        |
|                                   | Index**](https://www.nytimes.     |
|                                   | com/info/contents/siteindex.html) |
|                                   | | [**Site                        |
|                                   | Search**](https                   |
|                                   | ://www.nytimes.com/search/daily/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [**Forums**](                     |
|                                   | https://www.nytimes.com/comment/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [**Archives**](h                  |
|                                   | ttps://www.nytimes.com/archives/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [**Marketplace**](http            |
|                                   | s://www.nytimes.com/marketplace/) |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | [Quick                            |
|                                   | News](https:/                     |
|                                   | /www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/late/) |
|                                   | | [Page One                      |
|                                   | Plus](https://                    |
|                                   | www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/front/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [International](https://          |
|                                   | www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/world/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [National/N.Y.](https://www       |
|                                   | .nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/national/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Business](https://www            |
|                                   | .nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/business/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Technology](https:/              |
|                                   | /www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/tech/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Science](https://ww              |
|                                   | w.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/science/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Sports](https://w                |
|                                   | ww.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/sports/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Weather](                        |
|                                   | https://www.nytimes.com/weather/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Editorial](https://www.          |
|                                   | nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/editorial/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Op-Ed](https:/                   |
|                                   | /www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/oped/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Arts](https://www.n              |
|                                   | ytimes.com/yr/mo/day/artleisure/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Automobiles](https:/             |
|                                   | /www.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/auto/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Books](https://www.n             |
|                                   | ytimes.com/books/yr/mo/day/home/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Diversions](htt                  |
|                                   | ps://www.nytimes.com/diversions/) |
|                                   | | [Job                           |
|                                   | Market](https://www.              |
|                                   | nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/jobmarket/) |
|                                   | | [Real                          |
|                                   | Estate](https://www.n             |
|                                   | ytimes.com/yr/mo/day/realestate/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Travel](https://w                |
|                                   | ww.nytimes.com/yr/mo/day/travel/) |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | [Help/Feedback](https:/           |
|                                   | /www.nytimes.com/subscribe/help/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Classifieds](htt                 |
|                                   | ps://www.nytimes.com/classified/) |
|                                   | |                                |
|                                   | [Services](https://www.nytimes    |
|                                   | .com/info/contents/services.html) |
|                                   | | [New York                      |
|                                   | Today](http://www.nytoday.com/)   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | [Copyright 1997 The New York      |
|                                   | Times                             |
|                                   | Company](https://www.nyti         |
|                                   | mes.com/info/help/copyright.html) |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
